# Modelling-Stringent-Mitigation-in-Agriculture

## Summary: 
Using the Finite amplitude Impulse Response (FaIR) simple climate model, agricultural greenhouse gas emissions are reduced to a net zero over 30 years (2021-2050)to model stringent mitigation in agriculture, and the impact of this future climate scenario on global temperature was determined. Stringent mitigation in agriculture in the emission scenario modelled implies zero N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> emissions from agriculture (estimated) and sequestration of CO<sub>2</sub> that affects both CO<sub>2</sub> from land-use, as well as 20% of CO<sub>2</sub> from fossil fuel emissions. In 2017, approximately 75% and 42% of total N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> emissions respectively were estimated to be from agriculture (Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), 2020). This makes the case for how zero N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> emissions from agriculture are determined in the emission scenario. The results show that rigid mitigation in agriculture alone cannot limit warming to below 1.5˚c or well below 2˚c till the year 2100, even though it means zero emissions from agriculture – hence other sectors must play their parts. 


## Results:
The FaIR model was used to simulate the contribution of mitigation in agriculture to the achievement of the 1.5˚c target where no other sector contributed to mitigation. This accounts for two things: it assumes zero emissions of N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> from agriculture and it accounts for the sequestering of CO<sub>2</sub> (all of CO<sub>2</sub> Land Use emissions and 20% of CO2 emissions from fossil fuel). In the experiment, N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> values from 2021 to 2050 were reduced by 75% and 42% respectively (to portray zero N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> emissions from agriculture). To model carbon sequestration in agriculture, the negative values for CO<sub>2</sub> land use within the said time frame were used. Also, 20% of CO<sub>2</sub> from fossil fuels was removed for the same time frame. This was to account for the fact that in sequestering atmospheric CO<sub>2</sub>, some of the CO<sub>2</sub> emissions from fossil fuel will be sequestered as well. Results show that stringent mitigation in agriculture reduces the risks associated with near-warming rates and prolongs the time that global mean surface temperature gets to 2˚c above industrial times by approximately 20 years. In addition, results show that if climate change mitigation occurs only in AFOLU, no matter how stringent it is, it will not be efficient in keeping the global surface mean temperature below 1.5˚c or 2.0˚c throughout the century, hence, supporting the IPCC (2014) recommendation that climate change mitigation must come from all relevant sectors. 


## Methods:
CH4 and N2O: The agriculture sector is the largest contributor to non-CO<sub>2</sub>  greenhouse gas emissions (based on the amount of emissions that it contributes) (Frank et al., 2019). Non-CO<sub>2</sub> greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture include N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub>. In the experiment, N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> values from 2021 to 2050 were reduced by 75% and 42% respectively (to portray zero N<sub>2</sub>O and CH<sub>4</sub> emissions from agriculture), and the temperature predictions from that climate scenario were placed at par with the values from the RCP 4.5 projections. In practical, this scenario may imply zero livestock farming and a total overhaul of crop-soil management practices.

Carbon Sequestration: In this part of the experiment, carbon sequestration from 2021 and 2050 was modelled and compared with the projections from RCP 4.5. To model carbon sequestration in agriculture, the negative values for CO2 land use within the said time frame were used. Also, 20% of CO2 from fossil fuels was removed for the same time frame. This was to account for the fact that in sequestering atmospheric CO2, some of the CO2 emissions from fossil fuels will be sequestered as well.

## References:
RCP 4.5 Emissions Data: http://www.pik-potsdam.de/~mmalte/rcps/

Cowtan, K. & Way, R. G., 2014. Coverage bias in the HadCRUT4 temperature series and its impact on recent temperature trends. Q J. Roy. Meteorol. Soc. 140, 1935–1944. http://www-users.york.ac.uk/~kdc3/papers/coverage2013/had4_krig_annual_v2_0_0.txt.

FAO, 2020. FAOSTAT Emissions shares [Online] Available at:  http://www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/EM. Accessed on January 5, 2020

Frank, S., Havlík, P., Stehfest, E., van Meijl, H., Witzke, P., Pérez-Domínguez, I., van Dijk, M., Doelman, J.C., Fellmann, T., Koopman, J.F. and Tabeau, A., 2019. Agricultural non-CO 2 emission reduction potential in the context of the 1.5 C target. Nature Climate Change, 9(1), pp.66-72.

Smith, C. J., Forster, P. M., Allen, M., Leach, N., Millar, R. J., Passerello, G. A., and Regayre, L. A.: FAIR v1.3: A simple emissions-based impulse response and carbon cycle model, Geosci. Model Dev., https://doi.org/10.5194/gmd-11-2273-2018, 2018.
